you Irishmen are such an excitable
Bunch it's always fun to come to
Dublin I think it's probably too much
fun to come to Dublin actually yeah so
uh it's it's really remarkable to see
you all here and uh appreciate as I
always do appreciate the fact that
you've all taken the time and expended
the effort to to come and see this uh I
thought I would wander through the 24
rules and I don't know how many I'll
address but we'll see how it goes so
maybe we'll start with a rule from the
first book 12 rules treat yourself this
is rule number two treat yourself like
you are someone you are responsible for
helping that's a hard
one you know there's an injunction a
moral injunction that you should treat
other people like you would like to be
treated yourself the Golden Rule let's
say and uh rather than he who has the
gold makes the rules right um that's
that's not an injunction to sacrifice
yourself in some unending way for the
benefit of other people which is often
how it's interpreted and it's not that
it's uh it's advice in relationship to
reciprocity and this is something really
worth knowing I've been thinking about
this for a long time you know because I
got interested in the nature of
malevolence and motivation for atrocity
I got interested in the in the nature of
evil and certainly as a consequence of
studying atrocious Behavior at the
clinical level and then also at the
political and economic and sociological
level I definitely became convinced that
it's a very naive person indeed who
doubts the existence of evil I think
it's easier to become convinced of the
reality of evil than it is to become
convinced of the reality of good it's
easier to Define evil than it is to
Define good but if you can specify the
nature of evil you help yourself infer
the existence of good because you can
say to yourself You can conclude that
whatever good is difficult though it may
be to put your finger on it it's the
opposite of
evil I did have this inkling you know
way years ago when I when I taught at
har
I was teaching about very dark things
about individual motivation for the sort
of Acts that characterized say the worst
atrocities of the Holocaust and the and
catastrophic situation with regards to
stalinist Russia those were the two
places I focused on the most and I had
this voice in the back of my head always
when I was lecturing very serious
lectures that if I could really manage
those lectures properly I would do it
with a sense of humor and I thought that
just cannot be right how in the world
can you deal with a topic that dark in a
manner
that's
playful I thought that's but the voice
wouldn't go away and I knew there was
something to it I knew there was
something to it and
so I've been trying to think about how
do you
concisely conceptualize the opposite of
evil how can you tell when things are
going
the opposite direction what if there's a
malevolent spirit that might inhabit you
if you walk down the darkest possible
road what would be the opposite of that
Spirit if it is inhabiting you so to
speak if you were walking down the most
positive of roads and I would say I I do
believe this to be the case that that's
play so you know children play and it
says that there's a gospel statement
that unless you become as little
children you'll never enter the Kingdom
of Heaven that's a very complicated
statement it it means in part to regain
the pristine perceptions of wonder that
you you had as a gift in some sense when
you were a child if you have children
young children you you get to partake in
that if your eyes are the least bit open
because one of the things that's
absolutely wonderful about young
children and having them around and the
way in some sense they pay you for the
painstaking care that you need to
exercise when you're when you're caring
for them is that they enable you to see
the world through fresh eyes and to see
things in their in their Untamed by
cynicism glory and it's hard to open
yourself up to that you know especially
if you're an adult who's built layers of
shells around yourself for any number of
reasons but children offer you that
opportunity and so one of the reasons
that you should become as little child
is so that you can see Miracles when
they unfold in front of you instead of
being blinded by your own defense of
cynicism and children can definitely
help with that but also children play
and you know we sort of stop playing as
we grow older and we think we mature out
of it but that's not right what happens
is that we can no longer do it and a lot
of that I think is associated with the
shock of puberty you know because you
have to integrate sexuality into play
and that's really hard it's really
challenging for people partly because
you're more likely be rejected on the
sexual front for example and that's very
hard on people and then also it's a more
dangerous game that's for sure and so
it's a big Challenge and a lot of people
stop playing when when they're when
they're
teenagers one of the reasons I think
that we've had somewhat of an explosion
of unhappiness and mental illness um
particularly among women by the way over
the last 30 years is because a lot of
what we've done inadvertently has
interfered feed with children's ability
to play and so for example it's very
hard for boys to play in school because
almost everything they're required to do
is antithetical to the Rough and Tumble
ethos of masculine play that's really
hard on young boys and with young girls
oh I was talking I believe it was to
Jonathan hey recently a famous
psychologist in the United States and he
said that girls have almost stopped
doing Pat cake and skipping and that
sort of thing you know and these are
deeply embodied forms of play that might
be something like the female equivalent
of rough and tumble play among males and
that Rough and Tumble play is a form of
embodied dance you know because if
you're wrestling and and fathers really
like to do this with their kids and kids
really like it and they really need it
it teaches you the extent of your body
you know it teaches you how to twist
your body and to push it to its limits
and to expose yourself to fear you know
maybe your father throws you up in the
air and catches you CU imagine doing
someone doing that to you as an adult
12T High person just tosses you in the
air and catches you it's no wonder
children sort of scream with Terror and
Delight but but they do and they really
you just can't believe how much they
need that to engage in that play because
they also learn what hurts them and what
doesn't cuz the most fun direct physical
play with kids pushes them right to the
Ragged edge of disaster right it's like
it's right where it almost hurts that
it's most exciting and partly what
you're doing when you're playing is
calibrating it to make sure that it's as
exciting as possible but not too
exciting and the Rough and Tumble play
is deeply embodied it's not just
abstract right it it involves pain and
anxiety and excitement and frustration
and turn taking and detention it's very
sophisticated and that's just on the
Rough and Tumble front and then later
you know as kids develop they uh they
start to engage in pretend play and
there's no difference between pretend
play and thinking they are the same
thing you know and children Invision who
they might be they construct a fictional
character uh a father or mother Playing
House let's say that's very common form
of pretend play and then they act it out
and in doing so they inhabit the roles
that they're going to take on as their
adults and if they don't do that they
don't know how to do it you know one of
the things I was worried about to some
degree when when my son was little
uh he had an older his older sister
about a year and a half older he was
often surrounded by her friends and they
used to dress him up like as a princess
or a fairy and I was always looking kind
of at scance at that so I didn't want it
to go too far you know whatever that
meant but then I realized when I when I
was watching he was having fun and so
were they and I was watching it very
carefully to see what was going on and I
thought oh oh I should I got to leave
this completely alone because what he's
doing is acting out what it's like to be
a girl and how in the world are you
going to understand that if you can't
act it out and then if you forbid it say
you can't do that well what's the
message it's like you can't understand
females well of course you can't but you
shouldn't stop
[Applause]
your you should you shouldn't stop your
son from trying that's for sure and so
and that should be done in a spirit of
play and you know if you're if you have
a good marriage good partnership with
anyone I don't care who it is but let's
say a marriage the more that you can
Elevate what you're doing to play the
better off you are in every possible way
you know there are preconditions for
play among children one precondition is
the person that you would like to play
with has to want to play with you right
it has to 100% be voluntary it it cannot
emerge even we know this even psychoi
biologically there's a fair bit known
now about the say the underlying
neurological circuitry that's involved
in play because there's a specialized
neurological apparatus in mammals for
play and it's not merely a decoration on
top of something more fundamental it's
this is a very very deep and fundamental
uh part of the human psyche it any and
the psyche of any animal that has to
engage in reciprocal repeated social
interaction because you might ask
yourself you know how do you know if
you're interacting with another person
properly well you might ask well what
does properly mean well it might mean
they want to interact with you it might
mean they want to interact with you in a
way that could repeat many many times
and maybe improve as it's repeating know
you you want to get along with people
and you want it to work now but you want
to work now in a way that gets better
across time and then you might think if
that's the right way to act whatever
that means and it's a stable right way
to act because it emerges out of
iterated social interactions that you
might have an instinct to Mark when
that's happening and that's what happens
when you play and people find that
absolutely delightful if you're sitting
around with your friends in a bar
generally you're joking around and you
know that can get kind of rough but it
doesn't have to but it it could Edge
towards rough because that's kind of fun
and it's a bit proddy you know to see
where you can find the edge and that can
be riotously entertaining and um and
that's all done in the spirit of play
and so you could say that a proper
friendship is actually predicated has
its basis in the spirit of play and then
with regards to the atrocity and evil
that I was discussing earlier say well
if it's power and compulsion and pride
let's say self-center edness a kind of
narrow self-centeredness and a
narcissism hatred a bitterness all of
that mangled together
resentment vengefulness that all
constitutes the central spirit that
inhabits you if you're acting in a
malevolent manner
[Music]